UxPlay 1.44: AirPlay/AirPlay-Mirror server for Linux, macOS, and Unix.
======================================================================

Highlights:

-   GPLv3, open source.
-   Support for both AirPlay Mirror and AirPlay Audio-only (Apple
    Lossless ALAC) protocols for current iOS/iPadOS clients (iOS 12
    through 15).\
-   Support for older protocol (iOS 9, iOS 10) on older 32-bit clients,
    and on Windows AirPlay-client emulators such as *AirMyPC*.
-   Uses GStreamer, with options to select different output "videosinks"
    and "audiosinks".
-   Support for server behind a firewall.

This project is a GPLv3 open source unix AirPlay2 Mirror server for
Linux, macOS, and \*BSD. It is now hosted at the github site
<https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay> (where development and user-assistance
now takes place), although it initially was developed by
[antimof](http://github.com/antimof/Uxplay) using code from
[RPiPlay](https://github.com/FD-/RPiPlay), which in turn derives from
[AirplayServer](https://github.com/KqsMea8/AirplayServer),
[shairplay](https://github.com/juhovh/shairplay), and
[playfair](https://github.com/EstebanKubata/playfair). (The antimof site
is mainly inactive, but periodically posts updates pulled from the [main
UxPlay site](https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay)).

Its main use is to act like an AppleTV for screen-mirroring (with audio)
of iOS/iPadOS/macOS clients (iPhones, iPads, MacBooks) in a window on
the server display (with the possibility of sharing that window on
screen-sharing applications such as Zoom) on a host running Linux,
macOS, or other unix. UxPlay supports a "legacy" form of Apple's AirPlay
Mirror protocol introduced in iOS 12; client devices running iOS/iPadOS
12 or later are supported, as is a (non-free) Windows-based
AirPlay-client software emulator, AirMyPC. Older (32-bit) client devices
that can only run iOS 9.3 or iOS 10.3 are currently partially supported
by UxPlay: reports indicate that screen-mirroring video works, audio is
a work-in-progress, but is correctly decrypted. (Details of what is
publically known about Apple's AirPlay2 protocol can be found
[here](https://github.com/SteeBono/airplayreceiver/wiki/AirPlay2-Protocol)
and [here](https://emanuelecozzi.net/docs/airplay2)).

The UxPlay server and its client must be on the same local area network,
on which a **Bonjour/Zeroconf mDNS/DNS-SD server** is also running (only
DNS-SD "Service Discovery" service is strictly necessary, it is not
necessary that the local network also be of the ".local" mDNS-based
type). On Linux and BSD Unix servers, this is usually provided by
[Avahi](https://www.avahi.org), through the avahi-daemon service, and is
included in most Linux distributions (this service can also be provided
by macOS, iOS or Windows servers).

Connections to the UxPlay server by iOS/MacOS clients can be initiated
both in AirPlay Mirror mode (which streams lossily-compressed AAC audio
while mirroring the client screen, or in the alternative AirPlay Audio
mode which streams Apple Lossless (ALAC) audio without screen mirroring
(the accompanying metadata and cover art in this mode is not displayed).
*Switching between these two modes during an active connection is
possible: in Mirror mode, close the mirror window and start an Audio
mode connection, switch back by initiating a Mirror mode connection.*
**Note that Apple DRM (as in Apple TV app content on the client) cannot
be decrypted by UxPlay, and (unlike with a true AppleTV), the client
cannot run a http connection on the server instead of streaming content
from one on the client.**

UxPlay uses GStreamer Plugins for rendering audio and video, and does
not offer the alternative Raspberry-Pi-specific audio and video
renderers available in [RPiPlay](https://github.com/FD-/RPiPlay). It is
tested on a number of systems, including (among others) Debian 11.2,
Ubuntu 20.04 and 21.10, Linux Mint 20.2, Pop!\_OS 21.10 (NVIDIA
edition), Rocky Linux 8.4 (a CentOS successor), OpenSUSE 15.3, macOS
10.15.7, FreeBSD 13.0.

Using Gstreamer means that video and audio are supported "out of the
box", using a choice of plugins. Gstreamer decoding is plugin agnostic,
and uses accelerated decoders if available. For Intel integrated
graphics, the VAAPI plugin is preferable, (but don't use it with
NVIDIA).

### Note to packagers: OpenSSL-3.0.0 solves GPL v3 license issues.

Some Linux distributions such as Debian do not allow distribution of
compiled GPL code linked to OpenSSL-1.1.1 because its "dual
OpenSSL/SSLeay" license has some incompatibilities with GPL, unless all
code authors have explicitly given an "exception" to allow such linking
(the historical origins of UxPlay make this impossible to obtain). Other
distributions treat OpenSSL as a "System Library" which the GPL allows
linking to.

For "GPL-strict" distributions, UxPlay can be built using OpenSSL-
3.0.0, which has a new [GPLv3-compatible
license](https://www.openssl.org/blog/blog/2021/09/07/OpenSSL3.Final/).

Getting UxPlay:
===============

Either download and unzip
[UxPlay-master.zip](https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay/archive/refs/heads/master.zip),
or (if git is installed): "git clone https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay".
You can also download a recent or earlier version listed in
[Releases](https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay/releases).

\*Current UxPlay is also a pull request on the original site
https://github.com/antimof/UxPlay ; that original project is inactive,
but the pull requests are now being periodically merged with the antimof
tree (thank you antimof!).

Building UxPlay on Linux (or \*BSD):
------------------------------------

(Instructions for Debian/Ubuntu; adapt these for other Linuxes; for
macOS, see below).

Make sure that your distribution provides OpenSSL 1.1.1 or later, and
libplist 2.0 or later. (This means Debian 10 "Buster", Ubuntu 18.04 or
later.) If it doesnt, you may need to build and install these from
source (see below).

You need a C/C++ compiler (e.g.Â g++) with the standard development
libraries installed. Make sure that cmake\>=3.4.1 and pkg-config are
also installed: "sudo apt-get install cmake pkg-config". In a terminal
window, change directories to the source directory of the downloaded
source code ("UxPlay-master" for zipfile downloads, "UxPlay" for "git
clone" downloads), then do

1.  `sudo apt-get install libssl-dev libplist-dev` (unless you need to
    build OpenSSL and libplist from source).
2.  `sudo apt-get install libavahi-compat-libdnssd-dev libgstreamer1.0-dev libgstreamer-plugins-base1.0-dev gstreamer1.0-libav gstreamer1.0-plugins-bad`
3.  `sudo apt-get install gstreamer1.0-vaapi` (For hardware-accelerated
    Intel graphics, but not NVIDIA)
4.  `sudo apt-get install libx11-dev` (for the "ZOOMFIX" X11\_display
    name fix for screen-sharing with e.g., ZOOM)
5.  `cmake .` (or "`cmake -DZOOMFIX=ON .`" to get a screen-sharing fix
    to make X11 mirror display windows visible to screen-sharing
    applications such as Zoom, see below).
6.  `make`
7.  `sudo make install` (you can afterwards uninstall with
    `sudo make uninstall` in the same directory in which this was run)

*If you intend to modify the code, use a separate "build" directory:
replace* "`cmake  [ ] .`" *by*
"`mkdir build ; cd build ; cmake [ ] ..`"; *you can then clean the build
directory with* "`rm -rf build/*`" *(run from within the UxPlay source
directory) without affecting the source directories which contain your
modifications*.

The above script installs the executable file "`uxplay`" to
`/usr/local/bin`, (and installs a manpage to somewhere like
`/usr/local/share/man/man1` and README files to somewhere like
`/usr/local/share/doc/uxplay`). It can also be found in the build
directory after the build processs.

**Finally, run uxplay in a terminal window**. If it is not seen by the
iOS client's drop-down "Screen Mirroring" panel, check that your DNS-SD
server (usually avahi-daemon) is running: do this in a terminal window
with `systemctl status avahi-daemon`. (If this shows the avahi-daemon is
not running, control it with
`sudo systemctl [start,stop,enable,disable] avahi-daemon` (or
avahi-daemon.service). If UxPlay is seen, but the client fails to
connect when it is selected, there may be a firewall on the server that
prevents UxPlay from receiving client connection requests unless some
network ports are opened. See **Troubleshooting** below for help with
this or other problems.

**Red Hat, Fedora, CentOS (now continued as Rocky Linux or Alma
Linux):** (sudo yum install) openssl-devel libplist-devel
avahi-compat-libdns\_sd-devel (some from the "PowerTools" add-on
repository) (+libX11-devel for ZOOMFIX). The required GStreamer packages
(some from [rpmfusion.org](https://rpmfusion.org)) are: gstreamer1-devel
gstreamer1-plugins-base-devel gstreamer1-libav
gstreamer1-plugins-bad-free ( + gstreamer1-vaapi for intel graphics).

**OpenSUSE:** (sudo zypper install) libopenssl-devel libplist-devel
avahi-compat-mDNSResponder-devel (+ libX11-devel for ZOOMFIX). The
required GStreamer packages (you may need to use versions from
[Packman](https://ftp.gwdg.de/pub/linux/misc/packman/suse/)) are:
gstreamer-devel gstreamer-plugins-base-devel gstreamer-plugins-libav
gstreamer-plugins-bad (+ gstreamer-plugins-vaapi for Intel graphics).

**FreeBSD:** (sudo pkg install) libplist gstreamer1, gstreamer1-libav,
gstreamer1-plugins, gstreamer1-plugins-\* (\* = core, good, bad, x, gtk,
gl, vulkan, pulse ...), (+ gstreamer1-vaapi for Intel graphics). Either
avahi-libdns or mDNSResponder must also be installed to provide the
dns\_sd library. OpenSSL is already installed as a System Library.
"ZOOMFIX" is untested; don't try to use it on FreeBSD unless you need
it.

### Building OpenSSL \>= 1.1.1 from source.

If you need to do this, note that you may be able to use a newer version
(OpenSSL-3.0.1 is known to work). You will need the standard development
toolset (autoconf, automake, libtool, etc.). Download and compile the
source code from <https://www.openssl.org/source/>, Install the
downloaded openssl by opening a terminal in your Downloads directory,
and unpacking the source distribution: ("tar -xvzf openssl-3.0.1.tar.gz
; cd openssl-3.0.1"). Then build/install with "./config ; make ; sudo
make install\_dev". This will typically install the needed library
`libcrypto.*`, either in /usr/local/lib or /usr/local/lib64. *(Ignore
the following for builds on MacOS:)* Assuming the library was placed in
/usr/local/lib64, you must "export OPENSSL\_ROOT\_DIR=/usr/local/lib64"
before running cmake. On some systems like Debian or Ubuntu, you may
also need to add a missing entry `/usr/local/lib64` in /etc/ld.so.conf
(or place a file containing "/usr/local/lib64/libcrypto.so" in
/etc/ld.so.conf.d) before running "sudo ldconfig".

### Bulding libplist \>= 2.0.0 from source.

*Note: on Debian 9 "Stretch" or Ubuntu 16.04 LTS editions, you can avoid
this step by installing libplist-dev and libplist3 from Debian 10 or
Ubuntu 18.04.* (As well as the usual build tools, you may need to also
install some libpython\*-dev package). Download the latest source from
<https://github.com/libimobiledevice/libplist>: get
[libplist-master.zip](https://github.com/libimobiledevice/libplist/archive/refs/heads/master.zip),
then ("unzip libplist-master.zip ; cd libplist-master"), build/install
("./autogen.sh ; make ; sudo make install"). This will probably install
libplist-2.0.\* in /usr/local/lib. *(Ignore the following for builds on
MacOS:)* On some systems like Debian or Ubuntu, you may also need to add
a missing entry `/usr/local/lib` in /etc/ld.so.conf (or place a file
containing "/usr/local/lib64/libplist-2.0.so" in /etc/ld.so.conf.d)
before running "sudo ldconfig".

Building UxPlay on macOS: **(Only tested on Intel X86\_64 Macs)**
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*Note: A native AirPlay Server feature is included in macOS 12 Monterey,
but is restricted to recent hardware. UxPlay can run on older macOS
systems that will not be able to run Monterey, or can run Monterey but
not AirPlay.*

These instructions for macOS asssume that the Xcode command-line
developer tools are installed (if Xcode is installed, open the Terminal,
type "sudo xcode-select --install" and accept the conditions).

It is also assumed that CMake \>= 3.13 is installed: this can be done
with package managers [MacPorts](http://www.macports.org),
[Fink](http://finkproject.org) or [Homebrew](http://brew.sh), or by a
download from <https://cmake.org/download/>.

First get the latest macOS release of GStreamer-1.0 from
<https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/download/>. Install both the macOS
runtime and development installer packages. Assuming that the latest
release is 1.18.5 they are `gstreamer-1.0-1.18.5-x86_64.pkg` and
`gstreamer-1.0-devel-1.18.5-x86_64.pkg`. Click on them to install (they
install to /Library/FrameWorks/GStreamer.framework). It is recommended
you use GStreamer.framework rather than install Gstreamer with Homebrew
or MacPorts (see later).

Next install OpenSSL and libplist: these can be built from source (see
above); only the static forms of the two libraries will used for the
macOS build, so you can uninstall them ("sudo make uninstall") after you
have built UxPlay. It may be easier to get them using MacPorts "sudo
port install openssl libplist-devel" or Homebrew "brew install openssl
libplist". if you don't have MacPorts or Homebrew installed, you can
just install one of these package-managers before building uxplay, and
uninstall it afterwards if you do not want to keep it. Unfortunately,
Fink's openssl11-dev package currently doesn't supply the static
(libcrypto.a) form of the needed OpenSLL library libcrypto, and its
libplist1 package is too old.

Finally, build and install uxplay (without ZOOMFIX): open a terminal and
change into the UxPlay source directory ("UxPlay-master" for zipfile
downloads, "UxPlay" for "git clone" downloads) and build/install with
"cmake . ; make ; sudo make install" (same as for Linux).

On the macOS build, autovideosink uses OpenGL, not X11, to create the
mirror display window (equivalent to "-vs glimagesink"; "-vs
osxvideosink" can also be used). The window title does not show the
Airplay server name, but it is visible to screen-sharing apps (e.g.,
Zoom). On macOS, The option -t *timeout* cannot be used because if the
GStreamer pipeline is destroyed while the mirror window is still open, a
segfault occurs (this is an issue with the GStreamer plugins, not
UxPlay). Also, the resolution settings "-s wxh" do not affect the
(small) initial OpenGL mirror window size, but the window can be
expanded using the mouse or trackpad. In contrast, a window created with
"-vs osxvideosink" is initially big, but has the wrong aspect ratio
(stretched image); in this case the aspect ratio changes when the window
width is changed by dragging its side.

***Other ways (Homebrew, MacPorts) to install GStreamer on macOS (not
recommended):***

First make sure that pkgconfig is installed (Homebrew: "brew install
pkgconfig" ; MacPorts: "sudo port install pkgconfig" ).

(a) with Homebrew: "brew install gst-plugins-base gst-plugins-good
    gst-plugins-bad gst-libav". This appears to be functionally
    equivalent to using GStreamer.framework, but causes a large number
    of extra packages to be installed by Homebrew as dependencies.
    (However, as of November 2021, Homebrew offers a build of GStreamer
    for Apple Silicon, which then was not yet available on the offical
    GStreamer site.)

(b) with MacPorts: "sudo port install gstreamer1-gst-plugins-base
    gstreamer1-gst-plugins-good gstreamer1-gst-plugins-bad
    gstreamer1-gst-libav". The MacPorts GStreamer is built to use X11,
    so must be run from an XQuartz terminal, can use ZOOMFIX, and needs
    option "-vs ximagesink". On an older unibody MacBook Pro, the
    default resolution wxh = 1920x1080 was too large for the non-retina
    display, but using option "-s 800x600" worked; However, the
    GStreamer pipeline is fragile against attempts to change the X11
    window size, or to rotations that switch a connected client between
    portrait and landscape mode while uxplay is running. Using the
    MacPorts X11 GStreamer is only viable if the image size is left
    unchanged from the initial "-s wxh" setting (also use the
    iPad/iPhone setting that locks the screen orientation against
    switching between portrait and landscape mode as the device is
    rotated).

**Usage:**
==========

Options:

**-n server\_name** (Default: UxPlay); server\_name\@\_hostname\_ will
be the name that appears offering AirPlay services to your iPad, iPhone
etc, where *hostname* is the name of the server running uxplay. This
will also now be the name shown above the mirror display (X11) window.

**-nh** Do not append "@_hostname_" at the end of the AirPlay server
name.

**-s wxh** (e.g.Â -s 1920x1080 , which is the default ) sets the display
resolution (width and height, in pixels). (This may be a request made to
the AirPlay client, and perhaps will not be the final resolution you
get.) w and h are whole numbers with four digits or less. Note that the
**height** pixel size is the controlling one used by the client for
determining the streaming format; the width is dynamically adjusted to
the shape of the image (portrait or landscape format, depending on how
an iPad is held, for example).

**-s wxh\@r** As above, but also informs the AirPlay client about the
screen refresh rate of the display. Default is r=60 (60 Hz); r is a
whole number with three digits or less. Values greater than 255 are
invalid.

**-fps n** sets a maximum frame rate (in frames per second) for the
AirPlay client to stream video; n must be a whole number with 3 digits
or less. (The client may choose to serve video at any frame rate lower
than this; default is 30 fps.) A setting below 30 fps might be useful to
reduce latency if you are running more than one instance of uxplay at
the same time. Values greater than 255 are ignored. This setting is only
an advisory to the client device, so setting a high value will not force
a high framerate. (You can test using "-vs fpsdisplaysink" to see what
framerate is being received.)

**-o** turns on an "overscanned" option for the display window. This
reduces the image resolution by using some of the pixels requested by
option -s wxh (or their default values 1920x1080) by adding an empty
boundary frame of unused pixels (which would be lost in a full-screen
display that overscans, and is not displayed by gstreamer).
Recommendation: **don't use this option** unless there is some special
reason to use it.

**-p** allows you to select the network ports used by UxPlay (these need
to be opened if the server is behind a firewall). By itself, -p sets
"legacy" ports TCP 7100, 7000, 7001, UDP 6000, 6001, 7011. -p n (e.g.Â -p
35000) sets TCP and UDP ports n, n+1, n+2. -p n1,n2,n3 (comma-separated
values) sets each port separately; -p n1,n2 sets ports n1,n2,n2+1. -p
tcp n or -p udp n sets just the TCP or UDP ports. Ports must be in the
range \[1024-65535\].

If the -p option is not used, the ports are chosen dynamically
(randomly), which will not work if a firewall is running.

**-m** generates a random MAC address to use instead of the true
hardware MAC number of the computer's network card. (Different
server\_name, MAC addresses, and network ports are needed for each
running uxplay if you attempt to run two instances of uxplay on the same
computer.) If UxPlay fails to find the true MAC address of a network
card, (more specifically, the MAC address used by the first active
network interface detected) a random MAC address will be used even if
option **-m** was not specifed. (Note that a random MAC address will be
different each time UxPlay is started).

Also: image transforms that had been added to RPiPlay have been ported
to UxPlay:

**-f {H\|V\|I}** implements "videoflip" image transforms: H = horizontal
flip (right-left flip, or mirror image); V = vertical flip ; I = 180
degree rotation or inversion (which is the combination of H with V).

**-r {R\|L}** 90 degree Right (clockwise) or Left (counter-clockwise)
rotations; these are carried out after any **-f** transforms.

**-vs *videosink*** chooses the GStreamer videosink, instead of letting
autovideosink pick it for you. Some videosink choices are: ximagesink,
xvimagesink, vaapisink (for intel graphics), gtksink, glimagesink,
waylandsink, osximagesink (for macOS), or fpsdisplaysink (which shows
the streaming framerate in fps). Using quotes "..." might allow some
parameters to be included with the videosink name. (Some choices of
videosink might not work on your system.)

**-vs 0** suppresses display of streamed video, but plays streamed
audio. (The client's screen is still mirrored at a reduced rate of 1
frame per second, but is not rendered or displayed.) This feature (which
streams audio in AAC audio format) is now probably unneeded, as UxPlay
can now stream superior-quality Apple Lossless audio without video in
Airplay non-mirror mode.

**-as *audiosink*** chooses the GStreamer audiosink, instead of letting
autoaudiosink pick it for you. Some audiosink choices are: pulsesink,
alsasink, osssink, oss4sink, and osxaudiosink (for macOS). Using quotes
"..." might allow some parameters to be included with the audiosink
name. (Some choices of audiosink might not work on your system.)

**-as 0** (or just **-a**) suppresses playing of streamed audio, but
displays streamed video.

**-t *timeout*** will cause the server to relaunch (without stopping
uxplay) if no connections have been present during the previous
*timeout* seconds. You may wish to use this if the Server is not visible
to new Clients that were inactive when the Server was launched, and an
idle Bonjour registration eventually becomes unavailable for new
connections (this is a workaround for what may be due to a problem with
your DNS-SD or Avahi setup).\
*This option should **not** be used on macOS, as a window created by
GStreamer does not terminate correctly (it causes a segfault) if it is
still open when the GStreamer pipeline is closed.*

**Troubleshooting:**
====================

Note: `uxplay` is run from a terminal command line, and informational
messages are written to the terminal.

### 1. uxplay starts, but stalls after "Initialized server socket(s)" appears, *without any server name showing on the client*.

Stalling this way, with *no* server name showing *on the client* as
available, probably means that your network **does not have a running
Bonjour/zeroconf DNS-SD server.** On Linux, make sure Avahi is
installed, and start the avahi-daemon service on the system running
uxplay (your distribution will document how to do this). Some systems
may instead use the mdnsd daemon as an alternative to provide DNS-SD
service. *(FreeBSD offers both alternatives, but only Avahi was tested:
one of the steps needed for getting Avahi running on a FreeBSD system is
to edit `/usr/local/etc/avahi/avahi-daemon.conf` to uncomment a line for
airplay support.*)

After starting uxplay, use the utility `avahi-browse -a -t` in a
different terminal window on the server to verify that the UxPlay
AirTunes and AirPlay services are correctly registered (only the
AirTunes service is used in the "Legacy" AirPlay Mirror mode used by
UxPlay). If the UxPlay service is listed by avahi-browse, but is not
seen by the client, the problem is likely to be a problem with the local
network.

### 2. uxplay starts, but stalls after "Initialized server socket(s)" appears, *with the server name showing on the client* (but the client fails to connect when the UxPlay server is selected).

This shows that a *DNS-SD* service is working, but a firewall on the
server is probably blocking the connection request from the client. (One
user who insisted that the firewall had been turned off turned out to
have had *two* active firewalls (*firewalld* and *ufw*) *both* running
on the server!) If possible, either turn off the firewall to see if that
is the problem, or get three consecutive network ports, starting at port
n, all three in the range 1024-65535, opened for both tcp and udp, and
use "uxplay -p n" (or open UDP 6000, 6001, 6011 TCP 7000,7001,7100 and
use "uxplay -p").

### 3. Problems *after* the client-server connection has been made:

For such problems, use "uxplay -d" (debug log option) to see what is
happening: it will show how far the connection process gets before the
failure occurs.

**Most such problems are due to a GStreamer plugin that doesn't work on
your system**: (by default, GStreamer uses an algorithm to guess what is
the "best" plugin to use on your system). A common case is that the
GStreamer VAAPI plugin (for hardware-accelerated intel graphics) is
being used on a system with NVIDIA graphics, If you use an NVIDIA
graphics card, make sure that the gstreamer1.0-vaapi plugin for Intel
graphics is *NOT* installed (**uninstall it** if it is installed!). (You
can test for this by explicitly choosing the GStreamer videosink with
option "-vs ximagesink" or "-vs xvimagesink", to see if this fixes the
problem, or "-vs vaapisink" to see if this reproduces the problem.)

There are some reports of other GStreamer problems with
hardware-accelerated Intel graphics. One user (on Debian) solved this
with "sudo apt install intel-media-va-driver-non-free". This is a driver
for 8'th (or later) generation \"\*-lake\" Intel chips, that seems to be
related to VAAPI accelerated graphics.

You can try to fix audio problems by using the "-as *audiosink*" option
to choose the GStreamer audiosink , rather than have autoaudiosink pick
one for you. The command "gst\_inspect-1.0 \| grep Sink \| grep Audio"
\" will show you which audiosinks are available on your system. (Replace
"Audio" by "Video" to see videosinks). Some possible audiosinks are
pulsesink, alsasink, osssink, oss4sink, and osxaudiosink (macOS).

If you ran cmake with "-DZOOMFIX=ON", check if the problem is still
there without ZOOMFIX. ZOOMFIX is only applied to the default videosink
choice ("autovideosink") and the two X11 videosinks "ximagesink" and
"xvimagesink". ZOOMFIX is only designed for these last two; if
autovideosink chooses a different videosink, ZOOMFIX is now ignored. If
you are using the X11 windowing system (standard on Linux), and have
trouble with screen-sharing on Zoom, use ZOOMFIX and "-vs xvimagesink"
(or "-vs ximagesink" if the previous choice doesn't work).

As other videosink choices are not affected by ZOOMFIX, they may or may
not be visible to screen-sharing apps. Cairo-based windows created on
Linux with "-vs gtksink" are visible to screen-sharing aps without
ZOOMFIX; windows on macOS created by "-vs glimagesink" (default choice)
and "-vs osximagesink" are also visible.

The "OpenGL renderer" window created on Linux by "-vs glimagesink"
sometimes does not close properly when its "close" button is clicked.
(this is a GStreamer issue). You may need to terminate uxplay with
Ctrl-C to close a "zombie" OpenGl window.

### 4. GStreamer issues (missing plugins, etc.):

To troubleshoot GStreamer execute "export GST\_DEBUG=2" to set the
GStreamer debug-level environment-variable in the terminal where you
will run uxplay, so that you see warning and error messages; (replace
"2" by "4" to see much (much) more of what is happening inside
GStreamer). Run "gst-inspect-1.0" to see which GStreamer plugins are
installed on your system.

Some extra GStreamer packages for special plugins may need to be
installed (or reinstalled: a user using a Wayland display system as an
alternative to X11 reported that after reinstalling Lubuntu 18.4, UxPlay
would not work until gstreamer1.0-x was installed, presumably for
Wayland's X11-compatibility mode). Different distributions may break up
GStreamer 1.x into packages in different ways; the packages listed above
in the build instructions should bring in other required GStreamer
packages as dependencies, but will not install all possible plugins.

### 5. Failure to decrypt ALL video and/or audio streams from a particular (older) client:

This triggers an error message, and will be due to use of an incorrect
protocol for getting the AES decryption key from the client.

Modern Apple clients use a more-encrypted protocol than older ones.
Which protocol is used by UxPlay depends on the client *User-Agent*
string (reported by the client and now shown in the terminal output).
iOS 9 and 10 clients only use iTunes FairPlay encryption on the AES
decryption key they send to the server. Somewhere around iOS
sourceVersion 330 (part of the User-Agent string) Apple started to
further encrypt it by a sha-512 hash with a "shared secret" created
during the Server-Client pairing process. The sourceVersion 330 above
which the extra decryption step is carried out is a guess for a value
bigger than 320 and smaller than 380, and is set in lib/global.h if you
need to change it. (This applies only to audio decryption; since at
least iOS 9, the AES key used for video decryption is derived from a
hash of a key formed from the "streamConnectionID" received from the
client with the *hashed* audio AES key.)

The third-party non-free Windows software *AirMyPC* (a commercial
AirPlay emulator) uses an even older protocol: it not only uses the
unhashed AES key for audio, but also uses a video AES key derived as
above, but using the *unhashed* audio AES key. *AirMyPC* has a
distinctive *User-Agent* string, which is detected using two other
settings in lib/global.h that can be adjusted if necessary. These
settings might be useful if other AirPlay-emulators using this protocol
need support. Uxplay declares itself to be an AppleTV2,1 with a
sourceVersion 220.68 taken from an AppleTV3,1; this can also be changed
in global.h. (It is crucial for UxPlay to declare this old value of
sourceVersion, as it prompts the client to use a less-encrypted older
"legacy" protocol to make the connection with the UxPlay server; it is
probably not necessary for UxPlay to claim to be such an old AppleTV
model.)

ChangeLog
=========

1.44 2021-12-13 Omit hash of aeskey with ecdh\_secret (his supports
AirMyPC), or use unhashed key for audio, hashed key for video (this
supports iO 9 and iOS 10 clients reporting sourceVersion \< 330 ); make
internal rearrangement of where this hash is done. Replace decodebin by
h264-specific elements in the GStreamer video pipeline. Fully report
initial communications between client and server in -d debug mode.

1.43 2021-12-07 Various internal changes, such as tests for successful
decryption, uniform treatment of informational/debug messages, etc.,
updated README.

1.42 2021-11-20 Fix MAC detection to work with modern Linux interface
naming practices, MacOS and \*BSD.

1.41 2021-11-11 Further cleanups of multiple audio format support
(internal changes, separated RAOP and GStreamer audio/video startup)

1.40 2021-11-09 Cleanup segfault in ALAC support, manpage location fix,
show request Plists in debug mode.

1.39 2021-11-06 Added support for Apple Lossless (ALAC) audio streams.

1.38 2021-10-8 Add -as *audiosink* option to allow user to choose the
GStreamer audiosink.

1.37 2021-09-29 Append "@hostname" to AirPlay Server name, where
"hostname" is the name of the server running uxplay (reworked change in
1.36).

1.36 2021-09-29 Implemented suggestion (by @mrbesen and @PetrusZ) to use
hostname of machine runing uxplay as the default server name

1.35.1 2021-09-28 Added the -vs 0 option for streaming audio, but not
displaying video.

1.35 2021-09-10 now uses a GLib MainLoop, and builds on macOS (tested on
Intel Mac, 10.15 ). New option -t *timeout* for relaunching server if no
connections were active in previous *timeout* seconds (to renew Bonjour
registration).

1.341 2021-09-04 fixed: render logger was not being destroyed by
stop\_server()

1.34 2021-08-27 Fixed "ZOOMFIX": the X11 window name fix was only being
made the first time the GStreamer window was created by uxplay, and not
if the server was relaunched after the GStreamer window was closed, with
uxplay still running. Corrected in v. 1.34

Improvements since the original UxPlay by antimof:
==================================================

1.  Updates of the RAOP (AirPlay protocol) collection of codes
    maintained at https://github.com/FD-/RPiPlay.git so it is current as
    of 2021-08-01, adding all changes since the original release of
    UxPlay by antimof. This involved crypto updates, replacement of the
    included plist library by the system-installed version, and a change
    over to a library llhttp for http parsing.

2.  Added the -s, -o -p, -m, -r, -f, -fps -vs -as and -t options.

3.  If "`cmake -DZOOMFIX=ON .`" is run before compiling, the mirrored
    window is now visible to screen-sharing applications such as Zoom.
    To compile with ZOOMFIX=ON, the X11 development libraries must be
    installed. (ZOOMFIX will not be needed once the upcoming
    gstreamer-1.20 is available, since starting with that release, the
    GStreamer X11 mirror window will be natively visible for
    screen-sharing.) Thanks to David Ventura
    https://github.com/DavidVentura/UxPlay for the fix and also for
    getting it into gstreamer-1.20. \[If uxplay was compiled after cmake
    was run without -DZOOMFIX=ON, and your gstreamer version is older
    than 1.20, you can still manually make the X11 window visible to
    screen-sharing apps with the X11 utility xdotool, if it is
    installed, with: `xdotool selectwindow set_window --name <name>`
    (where `<name>` is your choice of name), and then select the uxplay
    window by clicking on it with the mouse.\]

4.  The AirPlay server now terminates correctly when the gstreamer
    display window is closed, and is relaunched with the same settings
    to wait for a new connection. The program uxplay terminates when
    Ctrl-C is typed in the terminal window. The **-t *timeout*** option
    relaunches the server after *timeout* seconds of inactivity to allow
    new connections to be made.

5.  In principle, multiple instances of uxplay can be run simultaneously
    using the **-m** (generate random MAC address) option to give each a
    different ("local" as opposed to "universal") MAC address. If the
    **-p \[n\]** option is used, they also need separate network port
    choices. (However, there may be a large latency, and running two
    instances of uxplay simultaneously on the same computer may not be
    very useful; using the **-fps** option to force streaming framerates
    below 30fps could be helpful.)

6.  Without the **-p** \[n\] option, uxplay makes a random dynamic
    assignment of network ports. This will not work if most ports are
    closed by a firewall. With e.g., **-p 45000** you should open both
    TCP and UDP on ports 45000, 45001, 45002. Minimum allowed port is
    1024, maximum is 65535. The option "**-p**" with no argument uses a
    "legacy" set of ports TCP 7100, 7000, 7001, and UDP 7011,
    6000, 6001. Finer control is also possible: "**-p udp n1,n2,n3 -p
    tcp n4,n5,n6**" sets all six ports individually.

7.  The default resolution setting is 1920x1080 width x height pixels.
    To change this, use "**-s wxh**" where w and h are positive decimals
    with 4 or less digits. It seems that the width and height may be
    negotiated with the AirPlay client, so this may not be the actual
    screen geometry that displays.

8.  The title on the GStreamer display window is now is the AirPlay
    server name. (This works for X11 windows created by gstreamer
    videosinks ximagesink, xvimagesink, but not OpenGL windows created
    by glimagesink.)

9.  The avahi\_compat "nag" warning on startup is suppressed, by placing
    "AVAHI\_COMPAT\_NOWARN=1" into the runtime environment when uxplay
    starts. (This uses a call to putenv() in a form that is believed to
    be safe against memory leaks, at least in modern Linux; if for any
    reason you don't want this fix, comment out the line in
    CMakeLists.txt that activates it when uxplay is compiled.) On macOS,
    Avahi is not used.

10. UxPlay now builds on macOS.

11. The hostname of the server running uxplay is now appended to the
    AirPlay server name, which is now displayed as *name*\@hostname,
    where *name* is "UxPlay", (or whatever is set with the **-n**
    option).

12. Added support for audio-only streaming with original (non-Mirror)
    AirPlay protocol, with Apple Lossless (ALAC) audio.

13. Added suppport for the older AirPlay protocol used by third-party
    Windows-based AirPlay mirror emulators such as AirMyPC, and for the
    protocol used by older 32-bit devices that can only run iOS 9 or
    iOS 10.

Disclaimer
==========

All the resources in this repository are written using only freely
available information from the internet. The code and related resources
are meant for educational purposes only. It is the responsibility of the
user to make sure all local laws are adhered to.

This project makes use of a third-party GPL library for handling
FairPlay. The legal status of that library is unclear. Should you be a
representative of Apple and have any objections against the legality of
the library and its use in this project, please contact me and I'll take
the appropriate steps.

Given the large number of third-party AirPlay receivers (mostly
closed-source) available for purchase, it is my understanding that an
open source implementation of the same functionality wouldn't violate
any of Apple's rights either.

Notes by Florian Draschbacher, RPiPlay creator
==============================================

(From the https://github.com/FD-/RPiPlay.git repository.)

RPiPlay authors
---------------

The code in this repository accumulated from various sources over time.
Here is my (**fdrachbacher**) attempt at listing the various authors and
the components they created:

-   **dsafa22**: Created an [AirPlay 2 mirroring
    server](https://github.com/dsafa22/AirplayServer) (seems gone now,
    *but code is preserved
    [here](https://github.com/FD-/RPiPlay/tree/d68110a7eaa63840c06fe2b187726cc640d76706),
    and [see here](https://github.com/FDH2/UxPlay/wiki/AirPlay2) for
    dsafa22's description of the analysis of the AirPlay 2 mirror
    protocol that made RPiPlay possible*) for Android based on
    ShairPlay. This project is basically a port of dsafa22's code to the
    Raspberry Pi, utilizing OpenMAX and OpenSSL for better performance
    on the Pi. All code in `lib/` concerning mirroring is dsafa22's
    work. License: GNU LGPLv2.1+
-   **Juho VÃ¤hÃ¤-Herttua** and contributors: Created an AirPlay audio
    server called [ShairPlay](https://github.com/juhovh/shairplay),
    including support for Fairplay based on PlayFair. Most of the code
    in `lib/` originally stems from this project. License: GNU LGPLv2.1+
-   **EstebanKubata**: Created a FairPlay library called
    [PlayFair](https://github.com/EstebanKubata/playfair). Located in
    the `lib/playfair` folder. License: GNU GPL
-   **Joyent, Inc and contributors**: Created an http library called
    [llhttp](https://github.com/nodejs/llhttp). Located at
    `lib/llhttp/`. License: MIT
-   **Team XBMC**: Managed to show a black background for OpenMAX video
    rendering. This code is used in the video renderer. License: GNU GPL
-   **Alex Izvorski and contributors**: Wrote
    [h264bitstream](https://github.com/aizvorski/h264bitstream), a
    library for manipulation h264 streams. Used for reducing delay in
    the Raspberry Pi video pipeline. Located in the
    `renderers/h264-bitstream` folder. License: GNU LGPLv2.1

AirPlay protocol versions
-------------------------

For multiple reasons, it's very difficult to clearly define the protocol
names and versions of the components that make up the AirPlay streaming
system. In fact, it seems like the AirPlay version number used for
marketing differs from that used in the actual implementation. In order
to tidy up this whole mess a bit, I did a little research that I'd like
to summarize here:

The very origin of the AirPlay protocol suite was launched as AirTunes
sometime around 2004. It allowed to stream audio from iTunes to an
AirPort Express station. Internally, the name of the protocol that was
used was RAOP, or Remote Audio Output Protocol. It seems already back
then, the protocol involved AES encryption. A public key was needed for
encrypting the audio sent to an AirPort Express, and the private key was
needed for receiving the protocol (ie used in the AirPort Express to
decrypt the stream). Already in 2004, the public key was
reverse-engineered, so that [third-party sender
applications](http://nanocr.eu/2004/08/11/reversing-airtunes/) were
developed.

Some time [around
2008](https://weblog.rogueamoeba.com/2008/01/10/a-tour-of-airfoil-3/),
the protocol was revised and named AirTunes 2. It seems the changes
primarily concerned timing. By 2009, the new protocol was
[reverse-engineered and
documented](https://git.zx2c4.com/Airtunes2/about/).

When the Apple TV 2nd generation was introduced in 2010, it received
support for the AirTunes protocol. However, because this device allowed
playback of visual content, the protocol was extended and renamed
AirPlay. It was now possible to stream photo slideshows and videos.
Shortly after the release of the Apple TV 2nd generation, AirPlay
support for iOS was included in the iOS 4.2 update. It seems like at
that point, the audio stream was still actually using the same AirTunes
2 protocol as described above. The video and photo streams were added as
a whole new protocol based on HTTP, pretty much independent from the
audio stream. Soon, the first curious developers began to [investigate
how it
worked](https://web.archive.org/web/20101211213705/http://www.tuaw.com/2010/12/08/dear-aunt-tuaw-can-i-airplay-to-my-mac/).
Their conclusion was that visual content is streamed unencrypted.

In April 2011, a talented hacker [extracted the AirPlay private
key](http://www.macrumors.com/2011/04/11/apple-airplay-private-key-exposed-opening-door-to-airport-express-emulators/)
from an AirPort Express. This meant that finally, third-party developers
were able to also build AirPlay receiver (server) programs.

For iOS 5, released in 2011, Apple added a new protocol to the AirPlay
suite: AirPlay mirroring. [Initial
investigators](https://www.aorensoftware.com/blog/2011/08/20/exploring-airplay-mirroring-internals/)
found this new protocol used encryption in order to protect the
transferred video data.

By 2012, most of AirPlay's protocols had been reverse-engineered and
[documented](https://nto.github.io/AirPlay.html) (see also [updated
version](https://openairplay.github.io/airplay-spec)). At this point,
audio still used the AirTunes 2 protocol from around 2008, video, photos
and mirroring still used their respective protocols in an unmodified
form, so you could still speak of AirPlay 1 (building upon AirTunes 2).
The Airplay server running on the Apple TV reported as version 130. The
setup of AirPlay mirroring used the xml format, in particular a
stream.xml file. Additionally, it seems like the actual audio data is
using the ALAC codec for audio-only (AirTunes 2) streaming and AAC for
mirror audio. At least these different formats were used in [later iOS
versions](https://github.com/espes/Slave-in-the-Magic-Mirror/issues/12#issuecomment-372380451).

Sometime before iOS 9, the protocol for mirroring was slightly modified:
Instead of the "stream.xml" API endpoint, the same information could
also be querried in binary plist form, just by changing the API endpoint
to "stream", without any extension. I wasn't able to figure out which of
these was actually used by what specific client / server versions.

For iOS 9, Apple made [considerable
changes](https://9to5mac.com/2015/09/11/apple-ios-9-airplay-improvements-screen-mirroring/)
to the AirPlay protocol in 2015, including audio and mirroring.
Apparently, the audio protocol was only slightly modified, and a [minor
change](https://github.com/juhovh/shairplay/issues/43) restored
compatibility. For mirroring, an [additional pairing
phase](https://github.com/juhovh/shairplay/issues/43#issuecomment-142115959)
was added to the connection establishment procedure, consisting of
pair-setup and pair-verify calls. Seemingly, these were added in order
to simplify usage with devices that are connected frequently. Pair-setup
is used only the first time an iOS device connects to an AirPlay
receiver. The generated cryptographic binding can be used for
pair-verify in later sessions. Additionally, the stream / stream.xml
endpoint was replaced with the info endpoint (only available as binary
plist AFAICT). As of iOS 12, the protocol introduced with iOS 9 was
still supported with only slight modifications, albeit as a legacy mode.
While iOS 9 used two SETUP calls (one for general connection and
mirroring video, and one for audio), iOS 12 legacy mode uses 3 SETUP
calls (one for general connection (timing and events), one for mirroring
video, one for audio).

The release of tvOS 10.2 broke many third-party AirPlay sender (client)
programs in 2017. The reason was that it was now mandatory to perform
device verification via a pin in order to stream content to an Apple TV.
The functionality had been in the protocol before, but was not
mandatory. Some discussion about the new scheme can be found
[here](https://github.com/postlund/pyatv/issues/79). A full
specification of the pairing and authentication protocol was made
available on
[GitHub](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/philippe44/RAOP-Player/blob/master/doc/auth_protocol.html).
At that point, tvOS 10.2 reported as AirTunes/320.20.

In tvOS 11, the reported server version was [increased to
350.92.4](https://github.com/ejurgensen/forked-daapd/issues/377#issuecomment-309213273).

iOS 11.4 added AirPlay 2 in 2018. Although extensively covered by the
media, it's not entirely clear what changes specifically Apple has made
protocol-wise.

From captures of the traffic between an iOS device running iOS 12.2 and
an AppleTV running tvOS 12.2.1, one can see that the communication on
the main mirroring HTTP connection is encrypted after the initial
handshake. This could theoretically be part of the new AirPlay 2
protocol. The AppleTV running tvOS 12.2.1 identifies as
AirTunes/380.20.1. When connecting from the same iOS device to an
AppleTV 3rd generation (reporting as AirTunes/220.68), the communication
is still visible in plain. From the log messages that the iOS device
produces when connected to an AppleTV 3rd generation, it becomes
apparent that the iOS device is treating this plain protocol as the
legacy protocol (as originally introduced with iOS 9). Further research
showed that at the moment, all available third-party AirPlay mirroring
receivers (servers) are using this legacy protocol, including the open
source implementation of dsafa22, which is the base for RPiPlay. Given
Apple considers this a legacy protocol, it can be expected to be removed
entirely in the future. This means that all third-party AirPlay
receivers will have to be updated to the new (fully encrypted) protocol
at some point.

More specifically, the encryption starts after the pair-verify handshake
completed, so the fp-setup handshake is already happening encrypted.
Judging from the encryption scheme for AirPlay video (aka HLS Relay),
likely two AES GCM 128 ciphers are used on the socket communication (one
for sending, one for receiving). However, I have no idea how the keys
are derived from the handshake data.
